README.md, before:

# Bitcoin Mini Project

## Requirements
Using the programming language of your choice implement a program that takes one string argument and 
publishes/stores that string on Bitcoin's blockchain.

The program should:

- publish on testnet
- assume a local Bitcoin testnet node is running
- calculate the appropriate fees

### Notes
- you will submit max 2 files, the source code (ZIP or TGZ for multiple source files) and an 
  executable (e.g. for static languages)
- If an executable is submitted it should be compiled for x86_64 (if on linux) or x86_32 (on Windows). 
  Unfortunately, I cannot check executables on Mac so make sure you use an interpreted language if you work on a Mac.
- the source code is your main submission and it should contain everything you want to share with me. 
  It should include detailed comments and everything else you think I should be aware of.

# Run

## Prerequisites
1. Make sure you have Java 8 JRE installed (version 1.8.0_151 or higher <http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html>)

## Installation
Perform the following steps:

1. copy *bmp.jar* to a target directory
1. if the standard configuration is not sufficient then create a file '*application.properties*' in the target directory and change the file accordingly.

## Configuration

The following properties can be set as application configuration properties (file *application.properties*). 

Property | Description | Default
--- | --- | ---
fee.per.byte | Fee per byte in satoshis | 100
value.hashed | Hash the input value with SHA-256 before adding to the blockchain | true

## Run Application
### First Run
The first time the application creates a wallet which needs to be filled. Perform the following steps:

1. Make sure that a local testnet node is running;
1. start the application:


    java -jar bmp.jar
    
1. Check the console where the wallet *address* is printed.

1. Use the given *address* to send some BTC to it (for example via <https://testnet.manu.backend.hamburg/faucet>)
1. The application waits till the transaction to the given *address* has at least 1 confirmation (for example via <https://testnet.blockexplorer.com/>)

### Next Runs
1. Make sure that a local testnet node is running
1. start the application:


    java -jar bmp.jar <value>

If there are no problems, the application stops normally and the *value* is added to the testnet blockchain.
The logging of the application is sent to the file 'logs/bmp.log' if the flow of the application has to be followed.

## Tested
The application is tested running correctly in the following environment:

- Java 8 version 1.8.0_151 (unlimited strength JCE enabled)
- local testnet lode: Bitcoin Core version v0.15.1
- OSX version 10.13.1

# Design
Java is used as 'programming language of choice,' in combination with the industry standard framework *Spring Boot*
and the standard bitcoin java library *BitcoinJ*. As build tool '*maven*' is used (a Java industry standard as well).
Lombok is used to limit the verbosity of Java.

- java 8 (1.8.0_151 or higher)
- Spring Boot (<http://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#boot-documentation>)
- BitcoinJ (<https://bitcoinj.github.io>)
- Lombok (<https://projectlombok.org>)
- Maven (<https://maven.apache.org>)

The starting point is the class '*com.ximedes.bitcoin.miniproject.Application*' and the actual work is being done in the 3 service classes:

Class | Description
--- | ---
FeeService | calculate the required fee for a given transaction
StoreService | store a given value in the blockchain
WalletService | handles the wallet (keys) and transaction management (creating, sending)

Most of the actual Bitcoin 'heavy lifting' is done by BitcoinJ. So a BitcoinJ wallet is used, an SPV client, for wallet handling, persisting
it to a file and the actual transaction handling (fee, creating  inputs and outputs, etc.)

## Fee Service
This service calculates the fee needed for a transaction. Within Bitcoin fee is calculated per byte, given to a miner. 
Within BitcoinJ the fee can also given per Kb to make it easier. The *FeeService* class can handle both. 
The fee is configured as application parameter to prevent it from being a hard-coded value.

## Store Service
For storing of a given value on the chain, the following is done:

- the Bitcoin operation *OP_RETURN* is used to store the given value;
- As the room for OP_RETURN is limited, and the length of the *value* parameter is not known in advance, we need to handle the case where the *value* needs more room than is available.

To guarantee that the *value* always fits, an SHA-256 hash of the *value* is stored, so the size of the 'value to be stored' is fixed and independent
of the *value*. The application is prepared to store *value* directly into the blockchain with application parameter '*value.hashed*'.

## Wallet Service
The *Wallet Service* handles the communication with the Bitcoin network and therefore the communication with the testnet node. 
The testnode could represent two things:

- a node in the distributed testnet;
- the container of the user's wallet.

Technically it is possible to communicate with a node and request it (private) keys to access/modify the funds of the user. 
However, this means that the private keys exposed in the local, but not necessarily trusted environment (laptop vs. a controlled environment of payment terminal).\
Therefore the application has its own wallet and funds needs to be sent explicitly, so there is no need to expose any private keys. As a future improvement
of the application, all funds could be sent to a given Bitcoin address (parameter or retrieved from the local testnode).
So we aim for the more secure solution, however with more fees involved to exchange the funds between different addresses.

It all depends on the actual purpose of the application and the given context, so if this 'mini project' becomes something large, the current setup
can be changed accordingly.

# Development
## Prerequisites

1. Make sure you have Java 8 SDK installed (version 1.8.0_151 or higher)
1. Add the Lombok plugin to your IDE
1. Use IntelliJ to clone the code at: (replace ``{username}`` with your *username*)


    git clone https://github.com/markwigmans/miniproject.git

The software is tested with 'crypto.policy=unlimited' to support (unlimited strength JCE). See 
<http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/8all-relnotes-2226344.html#R180_151>

## Build en Run

1. Checkout the project
1. Create a new config directory in: **{project-root}**/config/**{user.name}**/
1. Create a properties.properties file in: **{project-root}**/config/**{user.name}**/
1. Build your project with:
        
        
    mvnw clean install

1. Create a Spring-boot configuration and start your project main class *Application*
1. If you want to use external files for properties, add the following to your VM options (we follow the spring boot conventions)


    --spring.config.location=config/${user.name}/ --logging.config=config/${user.name}/logback-spring.xml

Commit message:

Add Dynamic FeeService to the application and make it the primary FeeService

README.md, after:

# Bitcoin Mini Project

## Requirements
Using the programming language of your choice implement a program that takes one string argument and 
publishes/stores that string on Bitcoin's blockchain.

The program should:

- publish on testnet
- assume a local Bitcoin testnet node is running
- calculate the appropriate fees

### Notes
- you will submit max 2 files, the source code (ZIP or TGZ for multiple source files) and an 
  executable (e.g. for static languages)
- If an executable is submitted it should be compiled for x86_64 (if on linux) or x86_32 (on Windows). 
  Unfortunately, I cannot check executables on Mac so make sure you use an interpreted language if you work on a Mac.
- the source code is your main submission and it should contain everything you want to share with me. 
  It should include detailed comments and everything else you think I should be aware of.

# Run

## Prerequisites
1. Make sure you have Java 8 JRE installed (version 1.8.0_151 or higher <http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html>)

## Installation
Perform the following steps:

1. copy *bmp.jar* to a target directory
1. if the standard configuration is not sufficient then create a file '*application.properties*' in the target directory and change the file accordingly.

## Configuration

The following properties can be set as application configuration properties (file *application.properties*). 

Property | Description | Default
--- | --- | ---
fee.timeout.ms | Timeout for dynamic fee discovery | 5000
fee.per.byte | Fee per byte in satoshis (if dynamic server can't be reached) | 100
value.hashed | Hash the input value with SHA-256 before adding to the blockchain | true

## Run Application
### First Run
The first time the application creates a wallet which needs to be filled. Perform the following steps:

1. Make sure that a local testnet node is running;
1. start the application:


    java -jar bmp.jar
    
1. Check the console where the wallet *address* is printed.

1. Use the given *address* to send some BTC to it (for example via <https://testnet.manu.backend.hamburg/faucet>)
1. The application waits till the transaction to the given *address* has at least 1 confirmation (for example via <https://testnet.blockexplorer.com/>)

### Next Runs
1. Make sure that a local testnet node is running
1. start the application:


    java -jar bmp.jar *value*

If there are no problems, the application stops normally and the *value* is added to the testnet blockchain.
The logging of the application is sent to the file 'logs/bmp.log' if the flow of the application has to be followed.

## Tested
The application is tested running correctly in the following environment:

- Java 8 version 1.8.0_151 (unlimited strength JCE enabled)
- local testnet lode: Bitcoin Core version v0.15.1
- OSX version 10.13.1

# Design
Java is used as 'programming language of choice,' in combination with the industry standard framework *Spring Boot*
and the standard bitcoin java library *BitcoinJ*. As build tool '*maven*' is used (a Java industry standard as well).
Lombok is used to limit the verbosity of Java.

- java 8 (1.8.0_151 or higher)
- Spring Boot (<http://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/htmlsingle/#boot-documentation>)
- BitcoinJ (<https://bitcoinj.github.io>)
- Lombok (<https://projectlombok.org>)
- Maven (<https://maven.apache.org>)

The starting point is the class '*com.ximedes.bitcoin.miniproject.Application*' and the actual work is being done in the 3 service classes:

Class | Description
--- | ---
FeeService | calculate the required fee for a given transaction
StoreService | store a given value in the blockchain
WalletService | handles the wallet (keys) and transaction management (creating, sending)

Most of the actual Bitcoin 'heavy lifting' is done by BitcoinJ. So a BitcoinJ wallet is used, an SPV client, for wallet handling, persisting
it to a file and the actual transaction handling (fee, creating  inputs and outputs, etc.)

## Fee Service
This service calculates the fee needed for a transaction. Within Bitcoin fee is calculated per byte, given to a miner. 
Within BitcoinJ the fee can also given per Kb to make it easier. Fee is calculated via dynamic fee discovery (<http://api.blockcypher.com/v1/btc/main>)
If this server can't be reached in the given anount of time (property *fee.timeout.ms*) then a static FeeService is being use.
The fee is configured as application parameter to prevent it from being a hard-coded value.

## Store Service
For storing of a given value on the chain, the following is done:

- the Bitcoin operation *OP_RETURN* is used to store the given value;
- As the room for OP_RETURN is limited, and the length of the *value* parameter is not known in advance, we need to handle the case where the *value* needs more room than is available.

To guarantee that the *value* always fits, an SHA-256 hash of the *value* is stored, so the size of the 'value to be stored' is fixed and independent
of the *value*. The application is prepared to store *value* directly into the blockchain with application parameter '*value.hashed*'.

## Wallet Service
The *Wallet Service* handles the communication with the Bitcoin network and therefore the communication with the testnet node. 
The testnode could represent two things:

- a node in the distributed testnet;
- the container of the user's wallet.

Technically it is possible to communicate with a node and request it (private) keys to access/modify the funds of the user. 
However, this means that the private keys exposed in the local, but not necessarily trusted environment (laptop vs. a controlled environment of payment terminal).\
Therefore the application has its own wallet and funds needs to be sent explicitly, so there is no need to expose any private keys. As a future improvement
of the application, all funds could be sent to a given Bitcoin address (parameter or retrieved from the local testnode).
So we aim for the more secure solution, however with more fees involved to exchange the funds between different addresses.

It all depends on the actual purpose of the application and the given context, so if this 'mini project' becomes something large, the current setup
can be changed accordingly.

# Development
## Prerequisites

1. Make sure you have Java 8 SDK installed (version 1.8.0_151 or higher)
1. Add the Lombok plugin to your IDE
1. Use IntelliJ to clone the code at: (replace ``{username}`` with your *username*)


    git clone https://github.com/markwigmans/miniproject.git

The software is tested with 'crypto.policy=unlimited' to support (unlimited strength JCE). See 
<http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/8all-relnotes-2226344.html#R180_151>

## Build en Run

1. Checkout the project
1. Create a new config directory in: **{project-root}**/config/**{user.name}**/
1. Create a properties.properties file in: **{project-root}**/config/**{user.name}**/
1. Build your project with:
        
        
    mvnw clean install

1. Create a Spring-boot configuration and start your project main class *Application*
1. If you want to use external files for properties, add the following to your VM options (we follow the spring boot conventions)


    --spring.config.location=config/${user.name}/ --logging.config=config/${user.name}/logback-spring.xml
